<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
			<p>They were up at cockcrow next morning, and away upon their long ride north just as soon as they had broken their fast, and procured fresh horses.</p>
			<p>Dominica felt herself to be moving in a dream; events had marched so swiftly that she was dazed by them. She awoke to hear Joshua scratching on her door, and for a moment imagined the previous day’s wild work to be a figment of her fancy. But Joshua’s voice, unmistakably his brisk voice, was bidding her rise up, and she knew herself to be living in no dream.</p>
			<p>Breakfast in a small parlour leading off the taproom downstairs awaited her. She found Sir Nicholas there, neat as ever, and because she was suddenly shy and tongue-tied she could only give him her little hand to kiss, and say in a voice that tried to hide her shyness: “Ah, Señor Nicholas, I see you have that clean ruff Joshua spoke of, so I suppose you did not leave your pack behind.”</p>
			<p>He flung up a hand. “A’ God’s Name, let me hear no more of that pack!” he said in comic dismay. “I have heard of little else from that tickle-brain behind you since my coming last night.”</p>
			<p>She looked round at Joshua’s disapproving face. Joshua pulled out a stool for her from under the table, but fixed a wintry look upon Sir Nicholas. “Ay, master, no doubt it is very well to talk in such careless wise, but I shall take leave to say that to throw away a new doublet of murry taffeta and a pair of stocks broidered with gold quirks about the ankles, not to make mention of a set of silver aiglets and a pair of trunk hose scarce worn, passeth the bounds of prodigality.”</p>
			<p>“Peace, froth!” said Sir Nicholas, and sat him down opposite to his lady at the table. His eyes smiled at her across the covers. “It is in my mind, ladybird, that we have not sat at table together since you were aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Venture</i>.” The twinkle deepened. “Do you remember that you were loth to take wine from my hands?” He picked up the bottle at his elbow and regarded it with uplifted brows. “You might well be loth to take this from me,” he remarked. “What is it, Joshua?”</p>
			<p>“Scarce potable, I allow,” said Joshua gloomily. “A very vile drink, sir, but what would you?”</p>
			<p>Dominica’s tongue became loosened. She must tell Sir Nicholas of the curious fancy that had come to her when Don Diego offered her wine of Alicante, and when that was done she found she had left her shyness behind her.</p>
			<p>The horses were saddled and ready. As Dominica set her foot in Beauvallet’s hand she looked saucily at Joshua, and said: “Now, Joshua, you shall see whether I can ride hard or no.”</p>
			<p>She showed her mettle that day; she had done with fears and doubts. While she rode with Sir Nicholas at her side there could be nothing to alarm her. She had doubted that he would not reach Madrid, and he had done so; she had been sure that he could not escape from prison, and he had escaped; she had feared that he would not survive yesterday’s grim work, and here he was, safe and gay as ever. She could never again doubt his extraordinary faculty of coming off safe from seemingly hopeless traps.</p>
			<p>There seemed to be no peril now. Joshua might sniff the air, and keep an ear cocked to the rearward, but Sir Nicholas, leading the way over the hills, was carefree and merry. So, too, would his lady be, then.</p>
			<p>The long journey taxed her powers to the uttermost, but she would not admit her weariness. She sat as straight as she could, laughed at the bad road, swore she was very well content, and had no wish to rest her limbs. They lost the way; why, it was part of the adventure, and her Nicholas would soon find it again; her horse stumbled on a craggy mountainside and nearly came down with her: let them not worry, she was safe enough; the sun was scorchingly hot: why, she was used to a hot clime, and would take no hurt.</p>
			<p>Joshua was moved to admiration. “With good leave,” he said, “I may remark that the señorita bears herself like an Englishwoman.”</p>
			<p>“This is to praise you, child,” said Sir Nicholas, amused.</p>
			<p>She nodded and laughed, and grew pink. “I shall very shortly be one, Señor Pirate, shall I not?” she said, and peeped at him.</p>
			<p>His hand closed on hers. “My heart!”</p>
			<p>They had to travel ‘cross country where roads failed them, and this meant slow going for the most part, for the way was very rough, and they had need to study the rough plans Sir Nicholas had made. The shadows were lengthening long before they came within sight of the sea, and Joshua began to fret. He pushed up alongside to gain Beauvallet’s ear. “Master, we shall never make it in time,” he whispered.</p>
			<p>Dominica caught the whisper. “Then let us press on,” she said. “We must have Señor Nicholas away tonight without fail.”</p>
			<p>That made Beauvallet laugh, and even drew a smile from Joshua. This, however, he quickly suppressed. “The señorita speaks wisely,” he said. “Rare to junket about Spain singing catches as though we were at Alreston, but I would take leave to remind you, master, that you are a hunted man.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, windbag,” said Sir Nicholas genially, “if I could make better way be sure I should. Broken knees won’t serve us. We shall make that port this night.”</p>
			<p>Make it they did, but later than they had hoped for, losing their road in the darkness, and only finding it again after much casting about. Dominica swayed in the saddle, upheld whenever it was possible by a strong, tireless arm, but when she heard Joshua swearing amongst the boulders she could still laugh, though it was but a weary, would-be valiant little laugh.</p>
			<p>They saw the lights of the tiny port ahead; Sir Nicholas snuffed the air. “I can smell the sea,” he said. “Courage, my bird!”</p>
			<p>Her head drooped against his shoulder. He made a movement to summon up Joshua upon his other side.</p>
			<p>“Walk warily now,” he said in a low voice. “If word was sent to the ports to stop our passage, those at Santander will know very well where to look for us.”</p>
			<p>Joshua started. “God’s me, I had not thought of that! Ay, they would remember how you landed there.”</p>
			<p>A drowsy voice spoke from Beauvallet’s shoulder. “Oh yes, they would never forget. We stayed with the Governor of Santander the day after you set us ashore, and I would you could have heard him.”</p>
			<p>Sir Nicholas looked significantly at Joshua. Joshua stifled a groan, and shrugged. “A posse of soldiers, I dare swear. I might have guessed we were not yet out of the trap.” He looked up at the cloudy sky. “What o’clock? Nay, how shall we say? It but remains to find no ship awaiting. What, would she stay right through the night? One cannot suppose it. She will sniff the dawn at hand and be off.”</p>
			<p>“Dawn, stock-fish?” said Sir Nicholas. “If it is past eleven you may call me a dolt.”</p>
			<p>“I have a better regard for my skin, master,” said Joshua, with dignity.</p>
			<p>They gave a wide berth to the cluster of cottages that formed the port, and pricked their way cautiously down the hill towards the sound of the sea lapping on the shingle. It was very dark, and the ground was strewed with rocks and hillocks and patches of stones. Sir Nicholas reined in his horse and turned in the saddle to speak to Joshua. “We make nothing by this. We shall do best to tether the nags and go on afoot.”</p>
			<p>Joshua nodded and slid down from the saddle. Sir Nicholas was on the ground, and already lifting Dominica down. Her legs almost gave way under her; she staggered and caught at his hand. He would have lifted her in his arms, but she shook her head. “No, no, I would rather walk. I am only so stiff.”</p>
			<p>They went forward, Joshua close behind them with the lantern he had bought that morning in Villanova. Somewhere below them the waves were breaking gently on the beach; the ground shelved steeply towards it. Sir Nicholas stopped. “Light the lantern, Joshua,” he said softly.</p>
			<p>Joshua knelt to open it. He looked up. “Master, a cloak to hide the light.”</p>
			<p>Sir Nicholas swung the cloak from his shoulders and held it round both Joshua and the lamp. Joshua was busy with his tinderbox; a spark flared, and the wick caught.</p>
			<p>Dominica felt numb with fatigue still. She sank down on a convenient rock and watched Joshua tending his lamp under cover of the cloak. The wash of the sea sounded like a lullaby; she wondered whether, somewhere to the north in the velvety darkness the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Venture</i> lurked. They seemed so alone in the world in this silence of the night that it hardly seemed possible. Down by the huts men might be stirring, but here on the shelving stony ground all was silent, hushed by the sea.</p>
			<p>Sir Nicholas looked keenly round, peering through the darkness. For as far as he could see there was no one abroad. Come what might, the signal must be given. He took the lamp from Joshua and held it high above his head. Then he dipped it quickly, and cloaked it while a man might count twenty. Again he showed it, and yet a third time.</p>
			<p>There was a pause. “Oh knaves, if ye be not there!” muttered Joshua. “Oh, Master Dangerfield, I do not trust you!”</p>
			<p>Away to the north out of the blackness shone a pinpoint of light three times. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Venture</i> had answered the signal.</p>
			<p>“Ha, true men!” said Joshua in high fettle. “I would wager young Master Dangerfield against an hundred!”</p>
			<p>His wrist was clamped hard. “Silence, man!” hissed Sir Nicholas, and threw up his head to listen.</p>
			<p>Joshua stiffened like a dog. To the west of them had come a shout, muffled by the wash of the sea.</p>
			<p>“God’s Death, they’ve posted a sentry on the lookout!” muttered Sir Nicholas, and pulled his long dagger from its sheath.</p>
			<p>Joshua had his head under the cloak blowing out the lantern. Heavy footsteps were approaching at a jog-trot. Sir Nicholas went forward into the night noiseless and swift.</p>
			<p>A man loomed up out of the darkness with a levelled halberd. He was on to Beauvallet before he realized it, and went down with no more than a groan as the dagger struck home.</p>
			<p>“Ha, neatly done!” said Joshua, not above a whisper, and with complete satisfaction. He put up his own weapon, which he had snatched out as he ran after his master.</p>
			<p>But in the distance another cry sounded, as though a fellow-soldier answered that first call.</p>
			<p>Sir Nicholas was back at Dominica’s side wiping his dagger. “More of them,” he said grimly. “The Governor of Santander has my compliments.” He swept Dominica up into his arms. “Lie still, fondling,” he said. “Naught to fear yet awhile. Down to the beach, Joshua, and on your life no sound!”</p>
			<p>He was off into the darkness as he spoke. Joshua crept after, murmuring to himself. “Naught to fear, forsooth! Well-a-day, well-a-day! and we with the whole pack like to be on us at any minute now! The fiend seize these stones!”</p>
			<p>They were halfway down the steep hillside, skirting rocks, slipping on loose stones. Above, on the higher ground, came the crack of an arquebus fired into the air.</p>
			<p>“Ha!” muttered Joshua. “That may be a signal to the rest of the pack, but I warrant it will bring our men on fast! I shall die in my bed yet. Courage, Joshua!” He felt level sands under his feet, and quickened his steps to come up with Sir Nicholas, lost in the darkness. Behind, on the high ground, footsteps were running and voices could be heard calling to one another. From the huts to the west came also a stir. Lights showed bobbing on the path above. The hunt was up.</p>
			<p>Dominica was set on her feet by the water’s edge. Sir Nicholas wrenched his fretful sword from the scabbard, watching those moving lights as they came nearer, wobbling down the slope, outlining the forms of armed men.</p>
			<p>The soldiers were casting about now from the looks of it. In the glimmer of the few lanterns Beauvallet could see them peering and searching with halberds levelled. There was but a handful of them, but enough to settle the account of two Englishmen; and from the huts, along the path upon the hill, more were coming to their assistance.</p>
			<p>Joshua had waded out into the water, striving to catch the sound of oars. He came back and touched Beauvallet’s arm. “To the right, master, I think.”</p>
			<p>Sir Nicholas took Dominica’s hand and followed. The faint sound of oars grew more distinct; others beside themselves had heard it. From further up the beach came a shout of command, and a surge of some four or five men towards the water.</p>
			<p>“Row, ye devils, row!” groaned Joshua, fairly dancing with impatience.</p>
			<p>The soldiers were slipping and stumbling over the shingle; from the dark water came a lusty shout; they could hear Dangerfield’s clear voice raised: “Pull, sluggards, pull!” Then the richer voice of the boatswain came to them, chanting in imitation of a waterman: “Heave and ho! rumbelow!”</p>
			<p>It was a race now grimmer than any that had been, a race between that boat cleaving desperately through the water and the soldiers pelting down to cut off the fugitives. Joshua stayed peering out to sea to spy the boat, but Sir Nicholas had his back turned and waited, drawn sword in hand, to check the rush from the land.</p>
			<p>The splash of oars was close now; another moment and Joshua saw the boat come nosing shoreward. Behind him the foremost of the soldiers had run on his doom, and Sir Nicholas’ sword was red. But now lusty seamen were wading ashore, jostling each other to be the first to reach land, and the air was rent by solid English oaths. The handful of soldiers on the beach drew back. They had courage enough, but lacked a leader, and it was plain that a sprinkling of soldiers could not hope to stand against this troop of bloodthirsty seamen. They fell back then and sent up a mighty yell to warn their comrades that there was need of haste. But the party from the huts was not yet at hand, though it was coming with all possible speed to the rescue.</p>
			<p>“Ha, rogues!” shrieked Joshua. “In a good hour!”</p>
			<p>“Beauvallet and spare not!” sang out the boatswain, and reached the sands with a splash and a bound. “How fares your honour?”</p>
			<p>“Rarely!” laughed Sir Nicholas.</p>
			<p>Master Dangerfield was at his elbow. “My God, sir, you have made it!” he cried, and grasped at Beauvallet’s hand.</p>
			<p>There was a fight in the air, all around the murmur of it. “Ho, Spanish Papishers!” a voice growled. “Now see what comes to those who chase our Nick!”</p>
			<p>A second voice bawled out cheerfully: “Ay, have at ’em, lads!” and there was a surge forward up the beach.</p>
			<p>Sir Nicholas was only just in time to stop it. “Back, ye rogues!”</p>
			<p>The rush was checked, but there was dissatisfaction abroad. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Venture’s</i> crew had been spoiling for a fight all this past fortnight of weary waiting; the excuse was provided, the men were elated, and it was felt that those who had the temerity to harry the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Venture’s</i> commander needed to be taught a lesson.</p>
			<p>“What, not one blow, sir?” said the boatswain reproachfully.</p>
			<p>Sir Nicholas was amongst his refractory crew. “Back, dogs! Man me that boat!” He beat them back with the flat of his sword. “By God, I will have you all in irons if you man me not that boat!” he swore cheerfully.</p>
			<p>There was a chuckle, a concerted move seawards; daggers were slid home in their sheaths. Somewhere near her Dominica heard a rough voice say appreciatively: “Ho-ho! The General’s back amongst us! I’m for the boat.”</p>
			<p>They manned the boat. They were disappointed at this tame ending, but it was held to be unhealthy for a man to go against the General’s orders. His ungrateful behaviour upon being rescued by his faithful crew rather pleased them. Easy to see Mad Nick was himself still! There was a cheer raised.</p>
			<p>The bulk of the soldiers were pelting down the slope of the steep hill now. Sir Nicholas lifted Dominica high in his arms and waded out last of all to the boat.</p>
			<p>The crew became aware of the lady, and let another cheer. Many hands were eager to receive her into the boat, foremost amongst them those of Master Hick who had once had his face roundly slapped by her. She stood unsteadily, a hand on one fustian shoulder, the other lost in a great paw.</p>
			<p>Sir Nicholas climbed into the boat and waved farewell to Spain. “Give way!” he commanded, and the long oars dipped in the water.</p>
			<p>Slowly they drew away, until the lanterns on the shore receded in the distance, and the last sounds from Spain died.</p>
			<p>Dominica, crouched in the stern, stole her hand into Beauvallet’s. His fingers closed over it; he looked down at her, and she caught the flash of his white teeth. “Safe now, fondling.”</p>
			<p>She nodded and sighed her content. Behind her, at the tiller, young Dangerfield spoke bashfully. “And a warm welcome for you aboard, señorita, be sure.”</p>
			<p>She smiled at him, but was too tired to speak. The boat cleaved on through the dark water until the tall sides of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Venture</i> reared up before it, and they heard excited voices, and saw the light of a lantern dangled over the side.</p>
			<p>“Safe? Have you brought the General off?” shouted the Master anxiously.</p>
			<p>The crew let as hearty a cheer as they could for their somewhat winded condition, and something very like a yell of triumph went up from those aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Venture</i>.</p>
			<p>Dominica was carried up the rope ladder and kissed at the top. “Welcome, my bride!” Beauvallet said in her ear, and set her on her feet.</p>
			<p>Men seemed to surge around them, questioning, congratulating. There was some display of thanksgiving, not unmixed with many a “Said I not so?” apparently addressed to those who had doubted Sir Nicholas’ ability to dupe all Spain.</p>
			<p>Beauvallet shouldered a way for himself and his lady through this excited crowd with a laugh and a jest flung carelessly. Dominica found herself confronting a small neat gentleman whom Sir Nicholas clapped on the shoulder. “Save you, Master Cooper!” he said. “I have work for you, as I promised.”</p>
			<p>“Sir Nicholas”⁠—the neat man wrung his hand⁠—“I count this escape as not less than one of God’s miracles, and a sign to these Spanish Papists⁠—a veritable Sign! What may I do to serve you?”</p>
			<p>“You may marry me, Master Parson,” said Sir Nicholas Beauvallet.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
